GLOBE REWRITE - PLANNING NOTES
==============================

Status: C0-C7 built.
C2 was checked on the target integrated GPU: frame rate holds with every
layer on and units tinted, and the three visible issues found there are
fixed (see C2).
C3 is settled.
C4 was checked; see the end of C4 for the two problems that turned up.
C5 (labels) has only been checked in node — not yet looked at on screen
(see the decision point at the end).
C6 (the carve model) is checked in node (npm run check:carve, 67
assertions) but not yet looked at on screen either.
C7 is the app itself and has not been looked at at all. The renderer is on
`/`; the old deck.gl map is available at `/?deck` for comparison.
C8 is next.

Problem
-------
This problem describes the old app (still true on /?deck; fixed on / by C7).

Rotation is the only camera change that moves vertices instead of the camera.
Pan and zoom push a new viewState and the GPU redraws the whole stack at 60fps
(src/main.js, the zoom handler). Rotation re-projects every coordinate on the
CPU through d3-geo, ~130ms, so a drag shows a coarse preview and the real map
arrives on release.

Fix: put the geometry in 3D on a unit sphere, upload it once, make the rotation
a mat3 uniform. Rotation then costs what panning costs.

This is a renderer rewrite. The data pipeline, the stats, the ranking and the
presets are untouched.

One exception: C6 changes what carving means (see C6).

Facts we are working from
--------------------------
Geometry (counted from public/data/ at C7):
  counties topo   159,248 pts   17,075 arcs   3,504 units
  boundary runs    89,942 pts    7,242 runs
  world land      202,276 pts    4,792 arcs   213 land, 1,355 lakes
  overlay lakes    12,136 pts
  border seams      1,130 pts      133 runs
  total            ~465,000 unique points, ~5.8 MB of JSON

  build-world.mjs ships Natural Earth's lakes at full detail, because the
  globe draws them over the map to cover the Census lake shoreline
  (generalized at 1.6 km, which facets past ~4x zoom). This also let the
  map's own over-lake layer be dropped entirely. The lakes are now the
  largest single thing in the compiled buffer, bigger than the counties.

Scale:
  GLOBE_SCALE = 1348.9 px (sphere radius at zoom 1)
  disc is 2698 px across at zoom 1
  4.72 km/px at zoom 1, 295 m/px at max zoom
  max zoom is a d3 scale factor of 16 (src/main.js, zoom.scaleExtent), which
  lands around deck zoom 4-6 (src/main.js, viewState). Not a tile zoom of 16.
  C7 feeds that same k straight to the camera; see the bridge note there.

Consequences of those numbers:
  - 325k points is one static mesh. No tiling, no LOD, no streaming.
  - float32 is not marginal. Design-box coords are ~10^3, one ulp is ~6e-5,
    camera multiplies by 16 -> ~1e-3 px of error.
  - chord sag L^2/8R stays under one pixel up to ~120 km edges at max zoom.
    County arcs, boundary runs and the 6 km world data are all far denser.
    Only the graticule and any long straight segments need subdividing.
  - the GPU already draws this whole stack every pan frame. Load is known-good.

Out of scope
------------
  - The AK/HI insets. Separate Deck, separate canvas, fixed camera, Albers
    (src/main.js, PROJ.ak/PROJ.hi), baked once at startup. They do not turn.
    They keep the current CPU path and deck.gl unchanged, and after C7 they are
    the only thing left on it.
  - build-data.mjs / build-tracts.mjs / build-world.mjs. They keep producing
    what they produce; a new compile step runs after them.
  - Anything the map shows. This is a how-it-draws change, not a what-it-shows
    change.

Chunks
------

C0. Spike                                                          [DONE, GO]
  Prove the core loop before writing anything else.
  Static sphere + county hairlines only, rotating at 60fps on integrated
  graphics, at max zoom.
  Deliverable: a throwaway page, a frame-time number, a go/no-go.
  Kill criterion: if 1px lines over ~320k segments will not hold 60fps on the
  weakest target machine, stop here.

  Built as:
    spike/build-geometry.mjs   compiles the shipped JSON to unit-sphere xyz
    spike/spike.js             WebGL2, instanced hairlines, rotation as a mat3
    spike.html                 the page and its readouts
    npm run spike:data, then /spike.html on the dev server

  Segments drawn (plan estimated ~320k):
    counties  142,212   boundary 76,488   world 66,262   graticule 10,768
    total     295,730 in 6.8 MB, one static upload

  The rotation matrix reproduces d3.geoOrthographic to 1e-16, so the spike
  measures the real view rather than an approximation. GLOBE_SCALE comes out
  1348.9 px from the same fit, unchanged.

  Result, integrated graphics (no discrete GPU), 75Hz so a 13.3ms budget:

    full stack        5.00 ms   295,730 segments   2.7x headroom
      counties        1.67 ms   142,212
      boundary        1.67 ms    76,488
      world           1.25 ms    66,262
      graticule       0.42 ms    10,768
    vertex floor      3.34 ms   same geometry, zero-area quads

  Measured by climbing the pass count past vsync and sampling again at double,
  so the slope is one pass and the fixed overhead cancels. Warm; cold is ~2x
  worse until the clocks ramp.

    - 67% of the cost is vertex work. Shader tuning is spent; the only lever
      left is fewer segments. topojson-simplify is already a devDependency,
      and at the home view the county data is finer than 1348px of sphere can
      resolve. A coarse level should roughly halve the floor. Banked against
      C3 rather than spent now.
    - fragments are only 1.66ms of the 5. C3's fills, band, halo and aprons
      are fragment work, so they land in the half of the budget that is free.
    - it replaces a 130ms CPU re-projection, so rotation now costs what
      panning costs, which was the premise.

  Three fixes took the frame time from 10.00ms to 5.00ms. Carried into C2
  verbatim, since two of them are easy to get wrong again:

    - extend a segment's quad along its own direction by halfWidth, NOT by
      halfWidth + feather. County arcs average ~2 device px at the home view,
      so the wrong version drew an 8px quad for a 2px line: 6.66ms -> 1.67ms
      on counties.
    - the antialiasing ramp is ONE DEVICE pixel. Scaling it by dpr makes every
      quad 6 device px wide to draw a 2px stroke.
    - collapse back-hemisphere quads in the vertex shader, rather than
      discarding them in the fragment shader, which still pays to rasterize
      them first. (The deck.gl path never draws this geometry at all — d3
      clips it on the CPU.)

  Not answered by C0, deliberately: line joins at corners (C0 uses square
  caps; the kill criterion is about frame time, not looks).

C1. Geometry compiler                                                  [DONE]
  New build script. Reads the existing topojson, writes binary buffers.
  Depends on: nothing.

  Built as:
    scripts/build-geometry.mjs        npm run data:geometry, ~1.5s, offline
    public/data/globe-geometry.bin    the buffers
    public/data/globe-geometry.json   the manifest
  Both outputs are gitignored: they rebuild in seconds from the committed JSON
  and nothing loads them yet. Track them at C8.

  What it emits (triangles, not vertices, in the per-group breakdowns):
    fills   598,409 vertices, 644,652 triangles, indexed, unit-sphere float32
              worldLand 229,458  counties 195,950  worldLakes 139,388
              nation 72,543      lakesUnder 5,269  aprons 2,044
    lines   445,433 segments, start/end pairs, one instance each
              worldLakeEdges 142,614  countyArcs 142,047  coast 79,200
              worldCoast 49,316       worldBorders 12,445 graticule 10,768
              lakeEdgesUnder 4,618    lakeshore 3,373     seams 1,004
              border 48
    plus a uint16 unit id per fill vertex, a unit id per line SIDE, and
    per-unit vertex/index ranges into the county fills for C6 to patch.

  lakesOver and lakeEdgesOver (the map's own lakes drawn over the county
  fills) are gone: Natural Earth's lakes, at full detail and drawn last, do
  that job and also cover the Census shoreline (see layers.js). One layer now
  does what two did — worldLakes and worldLakeEdges are 44% of everything in
  the file, so that's where the size is, not the counties.

  Six things settled that C2 and C3 inherit:

    - every line instance carries the unit on its left and the unit on its
      right. That pair is what says whether a line is a border and whose
      colour goes on which side. Two sentinels: UNIT_OUTSIDE (0xffff) beyond
      the map's units, UNIT_NONE (0xfffe) not a unit boundary at all. Exactly
      one side outside means a map-edge run; a single-user county arc keeps
      the same unit on both sides, which is how ARC_RECORDS marked the
      nation's edge, so the grey line and the band stay off it. The old
      edge/isBorder/foreignBorder/bandFilter tests all fall out of the pair.
      The sides come from ring winding, cross-checked by 225 geometric probes.
    - the coast halo is not a mesh. It's the coast group drawn a second time
      at width 16.
    - the aprons are real triangles, 6 km on the ground, shipped unclipped.
      Clip them to the nation mesh with a stencil pass — cheaper and more
      exact than a build-time boolean, and the nation mesh is already there
      as the white backing.
    - the antimeridian stops existing. Rings are unwrapped in longitude
      before triangulation, so a country straddling 180 is ordinary in a
      shifted frame. One ring wraps a full 360 and needs the pole: Antarctica,
      closed down two meridians and across the pole, where the pole edge has
      no length.
    - fill triangles need their interior edges refined too, not just their
      outlines. The outline doesn't need it (two triangles sharing a chord
      tile the quad it cuts). The horizon does: the renderer clips a triangle
      along the plane through the sphere's centre, and that cut follows the
      chord. 171,776 of the 505,428 triangles came from this when measured
      (totals have since moved; the ratio hasn't been re-run). The cost is
      inherent — a landmass has no interior vertices, so tiling Russia or
      Australia at 120 km has to invent them. Exempt: the white nation
      backing, which every county fill covers, so an unrefined chord there
      just pulls it in behind a county.
    - two source rings cross themselves after simplification and earcut
      fills the knot instead of the shape (CA-2401 by 12.3%, CA-4712 by
      1.6%). Not a regression: SolidPolygonLayer runs the same earcut on the
      same rings today. Everything else is within 2.6e-3% of d3.geoArea in
      aggregate.

  Open: SIZE. 27.3 MB, 17.3 MB gzipped, against ~5.8 MB of JSON today. It
  buys away the JSON parse and the 130 ms re-projection.

  Not a problem while only the harness loaded it, but C7 put it in front of
  the app, so it's now the first thing between a cold visitor and any map at
  all. Five levers on the size:
    - the world lakes (above, 44% of the file) are only at full detail
      because ~20 of them are near the map's units. The other 1,330 are
      scenery on other continents and can be thinned like the land around
      them.
    - topojson-simplify at a coarse level. Already banked against C3 for
      frame time; cuts size in the same proportion, roughly half. The world
      layer is the obvious candidate: build-world.mjs thins Natural Earth 10m
      to 6 km (median segment 11.2 km = 2.4 px at the home view), finer than
      1348 px of sphere can show. Worth doing for size and frame time; not a
      fix for anything that looks wrong (the ragged shoreline C2 found was a
      cap-shape bug, not a segment-length one).
    - lines are stored as explicit start/end pairs, duplicating every
      interior point (7.1 MB of the 20.2 as first measured; more now with
      the lake edges). A shared point strip with a per-instance valid flag,
      as deck.gl's PathLayer does it, would save ~2.9 MB. Kept as pairs here
      so C2 can lift C0's shader verbatim.
    - the nation backing may not be needed at all (1.6 MB): county fills
      cover it exactly, and its other job — masking the aprons — is a
      stencil pass off the same mesh. A C3 question, once the stack is side
      by side.
    - encoding, the largest and only free lever. float32 coordinates barely
      compress (gzip takes 38% off, vs. 71% for the source topojson, which
      quantizes to integers and delta-encodes along each ring). Storing
      quantized lon/lat and expanding to xyz on load costs no fidelity.
      Byte-planing alone, no format change: 12.9 -> 9.4 MB (measured).

  Also worth doing, unrelated to size: the whole buffer currently blocks
  first paint — after C7 that's the app's first paint, not a harness's. The
  sphere and graticule are generated rather than loaded, and the manifest
  already carries byte offsets, so drawing those and then world land first
  would put a turning globe up immediately. C8.

  Deliberately not emitted, though C4 and C5 want them: per-unit spherical
  centroids and bounding boxes (computeCountyGeo's job today, in projected
  coordinates), and anything for the AK/HI insets, which keep the CPU path.
  C7 derives centroids at load from the compiled county triangles,
  area-weighted, instead — a dozen lines in map.js against a build change and
  a bigger file. Bounding boxes never found a caller.

C2. Renderer core                                          [BUILT, LOOKED AT]
  WebGL2. Either raw or a thin wrapper. The scene is roughly one draw call per
  layer, so a full scene graph library is not obviously worth it.
  Depends on: C1.

  Pieces:
    - fill shader
    - instanced line shader with screen-space width, caps and joins
    - ribbon shader (may just be the fill shader)
    - camera: orthographic. Rotation is a mat3 uniform. Pan and zoom stay a 2D
      screen transform, as they are today.
    - horizon: discard fragments where the rotated position has z < 0. This
      replaces d3-geo's clipping.
    - no depth buffer. Draw order is painter's order, same as now.

  Built as:
    src/globe/{shaders,camera,geometry,layers,renderer}.js
    globe.html + src/globe/dev.js    harness, /globe.html on the dev server
  20 layers in painter's order. Horizon is one line in the fill shader. Aprons
  are stencil-clipped to the nation mesh. The band extrudes line instances to
  one side off the left/right unit pair, as C1 set up.

  The shaders compile and the scene draws. The band lands on the correct
  side: verified in Node by pushing a sample of every band group one km to
  the side BAND_VS picks — it lands inside the owning unit 85-99% of the
  time, against 0-10% for the flipped sign (the residual is a one km probe
  against a generalized, four-decimal shoreline, not a side error).

  Line joins at corners were the risk this plan called out, and two separate
  things go wrong there:

    - overlap along a run: caps overlap by a stroke width however short the
      segment is, so a 50% line reads 68% at the home view and 51% at 16x,
      and county borders fade as you zoom. Tried a coverage buffer (draw the
      group into R8 with MAX blending, composite once) — slower and worse to
      look at on the target integrated GPU, so it's deleted. The fade is the
      price; it's a shade of white on a hairline and the shipped deck.gl map
      carries the same hairlines at the same alpha. If it ever matters, the
      fix is a shared point strip with adjacency, which C1 wants anyway to
      save 2.9 MB.
    - the shape of the corner: a square cap's corner reaches sqrt(2) half
      widths from the vertex rather than one, 41% of the half width at every
      turn. On a 1px hairline that's 0.2px (below the threshold that made
      the first pass look settled). On the 16px coast halo it's 3.3px, and
      the world coastline turns by more than 90° at a quarter of its
      vertices (median segment 11.2 km = 2.4 px at the home view) — visibly
      spiky, ragged.

  Fixed by measuring to the segment instead of to its centreline in LINE_FS,
  which rounds both the cap and the join (two capsules sharing an endpoint
  union into exactly the round-jointed stroke). No adjacency needed, half a
  feather of extra quad length. Checked against the exact stroke in Node:
  3.23 px of overshoot before, 0.00 px after, no holes either way. This also
  matches parity — every PathLayer in main.js sets jointRounded and
  capRounded.

  The band was rebuilt. C1 and C2 both originally modeled it as a ribbon
  extruded off each border segment, using the line instance's left/right
  unit pair. That's wrong: a quad thrown off one segment knows nothing about
  where the unit goes at the next vertex, so wherever the border bends away
  by more than a right angle the quad covers ground the unit doesn't own.
  Measured on the coast runs, the ribbon's outer corner lands in the sea at
  35% of segments at the home view, 31% at 4x, 27% at 16x — doesn't improve
  with zoom, since the band is a fixed pixel width and a coastline is about
  as rough at one scale as the next.

  main.js never had this bug: its band is the county fill drawn again in the
  deeper colour, clipped to a mask, so it's the state's own ground by
  construction and can't spill across a border. The renderer now does the
  same thing with the stencil: stroke the borders into one bit with the
  colour mask off, then draw the county fill group a second time through it
  in the band palette. Pixel width kept, spill made structurally impossible,
  and the separate band program is deleted — the line and fill programs
  already do both halves.

  Two things that follow:
    - there are two palettes now, same layout: the fill a unit wears and the
      deeper colour its band wears. The band pass is the fill program
      reading the second one.
    - the stencil holds two masks, a bit each: 0x01 the nation (for the seam
      aprons), 0x02 the band.

  Lesson for future line/ribbon work: a screen-space extrusion off one
  segment is only correct where the geometry is smooth at the scale of the
  stroke. Square caps and the extruded band were the same mistake at two
  widths.

C3. Styling parity                                            [BUILT, UNSEEN]
  Reproduce what is on screen today, layer for layer.
  Depends on: C2.

  Never had a chunk of its own in the end. Its four parity errors were found
  and fixed inside C2's placeholder table; the rest (the palette, the
  atlas/data switching, the dimmed and highlighted variants) couldn't be
  built against a harness with no states, so it landed in C7 with the app
  behind it. layers.js is the deliverable and is written to be read as one.

  Four parity errors found and fixed in the C2 placeholder table:
    - world land wore main.js's LAND (the dark border line beyond the map's
      units) instead of WORLD_LAND (the tan a non-union unit wears) — every
      continent outside North America came out as a slate-grey void. The
      border line then wore the coast blue instead of the dark colour. Both
      were one wrong constant; COLORS is now named for what each entry
      paints rather than for the constant it came from.
    - the lakeshore runs weren't drawn at all. main.js draws the map's outer
      edge as coast plus lakeshore in one blue line, and only the coast half
      gets the halo, so the Great Lakes shoreline had no line on it.
    - the over-lake edges were the lake blue at 2px; they're the coast blue
      at 1.1px, matching the lakeshore treatment they're meant to be
      indistinguishable from.
    - the sphere was #eaf3f9 against OCEAN's #e8f1f7.

  Still open, and not a wrong constant: main.js draws the under-lake edges in
  ground units, so they scale with zoom. The globe renderer has pixel widths
  only. Either give the line shader a ground-width mode or accept the
  difference — it exists to close generalization slivers under the white
  backing, so pixels may well be fine.

  Palette texture: unit id -> RGBA. County fill, band colour, and the dimmed
  and highlighted variants. Painting a county becomes one texel write
  instead of re-uploading a colour attribute. Same for hover tint and
  selection.

  Built at C7 as TWO textures, not one: the palette above answers a
  one-unit question, but a state border, the band and the selection
  outline all ask about the two units a segment separates. See C7 for the
  second table.

  Layer list to match (main.js buildLayers, `mapLayers`), against C7's
  layers.js:
    sphere, graticule                                     — same, globe mode only
    world: coast halo, land, borders, lakes, lake edges, coast line
                                                          — same, except the
      lakes and their edges are drawn once, last, over the map instead of
      twice (the same change that dropped lakesOver from C1's output).
    map: lakes under, coast halo, nation backing, seam aprons, counties,
         band, map lines, lakes over, lake edges, coast line, border line
                                                          — same, minus the
      two lakes-over layers, now covered by the world lakes above.
    data view symbols                                     — moved to the
      overlay SVG (#data-marks): the one piece of map content placed from a
      projected centroid rather than drawn from the sphere.
    selection casing and outline                          — same, drawn
      inside the cached scene rather than over it; see C7.

  Atlas/data view switching is now a palette swap plus visibility flags:
  three flags on the layer table (globeOnly, hideInData, dataColor) and one
  repaint of the palette.

C4. Picking and hover                                      [BUILT, LOOKED AT]
  Depends on: C2.
  Ray-sphere intersection gives lon/lat from a mouse position analytically.
  Then a bbox index (R-tree or a simple lat/lon grid) over units, then
  point-in-polygon against the source rings.
  Replaces GPU colour picking and removes the readback stall that currently
  forces picking to pause during gestures (src/main.js, `gesturing`).
  Also replaces carveIndex, which works in plane coordinates today.

  Built as:
    camera.unproject()          the closed-form inverse
    src/globe/pick.js           the lon/lat index. at(lon, lat) and nothing else
    src/globe/source.js         the source rings, decoded from the shipped topojson
    scripts/pick-check.mjs      npm run check:pick
    the scene framebuffer, PRESENT_VS/FS, camera.view.version
                                so a hover does not redraw the map. See below.
  Both halves are pure maths over data the app already has, so both are
  checked in node rather than by moving a mouse. No new build step and no new
  data: the index reads na-counties-topo.json, which the app loads anyway,
  and the manifest's `units` list ties a ring to the id the palette is keyed
  by.

  Measured: 0.5 us per pick, 14 ms to build the index (3,504 units, 9,885
  polygons, 45k entries over a half-degree grid) — four orders of magnitude
  under a frame, so a pointermove-driven pick (including mid-drag) has no
  reason to pause.

  Four things settled:

    - unproject is exact, measured in screen space rather than ground
      distance (the projection is singular at the limb, so a ground-distance
      error blows up there for reasons unrelated to the code). Round-tripping
      through d3.geoOrthographic is 1.7e-10 px anywhere on the disc, and
      8e-8 m on the ground once clear of the outer 2%.
    - the camera keeps two copies of the rotation. Reading the uniform's
      Float32Array on the CPU put the inverse 1.5e-6 out — 0.03 px at
      maximum zoom, invisible, but a hundred times what the forward matrix
      is held to. A float64 copy costs 36 bytes.
    - lon/lat containment is planar and d3.geoContains is spherical — not the
      same test. Over 19k points, the sphere disputes 0.036%, and every one
      of those sits within 22 m of an edge (about what a great circle
      departs from a straight lon/lat line across a generalized county
      edge). Not worth spherical arithmetic.
    - county rings are coarser than they look — a whole county is often 14
      vertices. A sampler drawing a point on the chord between two ring
      vertices landed exactly on an edge about one time in seven (a coin
      toss between the two tests), which read as a 9.6% disagreement rate
      that was entirely the sampler.

  Not wired into main.js at C4. carveIndex's callers want a knife stroke in
  lon/lat, which is C7's job. The index answers "which unit is at this
  lon/lat" and nothing else; per-unit bbox and single-unit containment tests
  were written, found unused, and removed.

  C7 wired half of that. pickCounty now asks the index outside an inset box
  and the inset deck inside one, and the gesture pause is gone — the tint
  keeps up through a pan and a wheel. carveIndex is still projected, because
  C7 held carving back entirely; it goes with the rest of the carve path in
  C8. The bbox and containment tests still have no caller.

  Hover is drawn as the hovered unit's own slice of the county fills,
  tinted, on top of the finished map — not as a palette write, matching
  where the deck.gl version landed. First use of C1's per-unit index ranges.

  A fast pick is not a fast hover: picking cost 0.5 us but the tint still
  trailed the cursor at the North America view (not zoomed in). The pick
  itself isn't zoom-dependent; how much of the map rasterizes per frame is,
  and the tint was being composited inside the scene, so every pointer move
  cost a full redraw of it.

  Fixed the way the deck.gl app avoids it structurally: its hover tint is a
  layer on a second canvas over the map, so a hover redraws one small
  overlay (main.js, refreshHoverOnly). The renderer does the same with a
  framebuffer — the scene draws into a texture, a hover frame copies that
  texture and draws one county over it. Has to be one context, since a
  second one couldn't share the 28 MB of buffers. Labels draw inside the
  cached pass, since they move only when the map moves.

  The copy is a textured quad, not gl.blitFramebuffer: the context is
  created with alpha: false (canvas is RGB8) while the scene texture is
  RGBA8, and a blit between incompatible formats is an INVALID_OPERATION
  that fails silently — black canvas, nothing thrown, only the hover tint
  drawn straight to the canvas afterward still showing. A fragment shader
  doing texelFetch(scene, ivec2(gl_FragCoord.xy), 0) has no format rule, no
  filtering, no half-texel error.

  Anything that moves independently of the map wants to be outside the
  cached scene — that list grows in C6 and C7 (selection outline, knife
  line, carve preview). The framebuffer decides this once, rather than per
  feature.

  Tried and rejected:
    - a live "pick cost" readout on the panel: pick cost varies two orders of
      magnitude across the map (northern Canada's long rings hit 90us vs. a
      0.5us median), so in the worst spot the readout itself was a 45ms
      stall. scripts/pick-check.mjs already reports the number properly.
    - deferring the pick to the top of the next frame, as main.js does.
      main.js needs this because its pick reads a pixel back off the GPU;
      this pick is sub-microsecond and gains nothing from batching.

C5. Labels                                                             [BUILT]
  Depends on: C2.

  Decided: run the existing labels.js layout in Mercator instead of the
  projected plane, and bake the result. Mercator is conformal, so the shape
  work the layout does (PCA long axis, quadratic baseline, room to either
  side) operates on undistorted shape. Raw lat/lon would stretch longitude by
  1/cos(lat) and tilt every long axis.

  Bake per state: baseline as lon/lat points, plus a font size and letter
  spacing.
  Per frame: project the baseline, lay glyph quads along it, each rotated to
  the projected tangent. Vertex shader, no CPU work.

  The layout then depends only on territory, which labels.js already caches
  against assignVersion. Rotation stops touching labels. Painting still
  triggers a relayout, same as today.

  Three things to get right:
    - store the fitted size in ground units (km or radians), not Mercator
      units. Mercator scale is sec(lat), so a size fitted in frame units
      comes out 1.18x at 32N, 1.35x at 42N, 3.07x at 71N — Montana would
      render visibly larger than Arizona for no reason.
    - glyph foreshortening is a shader uniform, not a pipeline decision.
      Clamp compression at ~0.5: painted-on through most of the disc, no
      edge-on slivers at the rim.
    - step 5 (leader-line labels for states too small for their name) packs
      against screen-space collisions, so it stays viewer-dependent. Baked,
      two can overlap near the limb. Either accept it or run a debounced
      repack for just those.

  Known limit, not a blocker now: Mercator degrades with latitude. California
  spans 32-42N (~15% more stretch at the top). Alaska spans 51-71N (~2x, so
  its long axis leans too north-south) — low stakes while its usable label is
  in the inset box. If the map ever goes beyond North America, keep the
  shared grid global (cell assignment is topological, and its area
  comparisons are between neighbours at similar latitudes, so distortion
  cancels) and move the per-state baseline fit into a frame centred on that
  state.

  Built as:
    src/labels.js               two new options, and geometry instead of strings
    src/globe/label-layout.js   the Mercator frame, the raster, the bake
    src/globe/atlas.js          the SDF glyph atlas
    src/globe/labels.js         per-frame placement and the draw
    shaders.js TEXT_VS/TEXT_FS
    scripts/label-check.mjs     npm run check:labels

  Measured: 95 ms for the whole continent's layout over a 1637x1881 raster
  (3.08M cells, against 3.23M for the projected raster today), 51 labels, 8
  abbreviations, 1 leader. The 95 ms is paid when territory changes, which is
  what the chunk is for; a turn of the globe costs a few thousand multiplies.

  Six things settled:

    - sec(latitude) correction is the core of this chunk. labels.js gained
      one option, sizeScale(comp): the size caps go in multiplied by the
      local Mercator stretch and the fitted size comes back divided by it.
      Measured over the real map: ground sizes come out 6.2-15.0 map units
      with it and 8.4-35.2 without, so uncorrected the largest label would be
      more than double NAME_MAX. The check asserts both numbers.
    - the raster's scale is a memory decision only, once sizes are
      converted. At the sphere's own scale Mercator's tail toward the
      Canadian Arctic takes the grid to 10.4M cells; at half it's 3.08M, a
      shade under the projected raster's cost today. Every constant in
      labels.js is in map units and passes through sizeScale, so halving it
      only changes the allocation.
    - labels.js now emits baseline points and lets its consumer format them,
      instead of building "M12.3 45.6L..." strings inline (which no
      per-frame consumer could use). toSvg builds the string; main.js and
      the two inset labelers are otherwise untouched.
    - a leader label is not a second kind of thing. Its text is level in the
      raster, which on the sphere is the local parallel, so it gets a
      two-point baseline of its own width and goes through the same placer.
    - the glyph atlas is a signed distance field, generated at runtime, one
      cell at a time, on demand. Needed because labels are sized in ground
      units (a name 10px at the home view is 160px at max zoom, and a bitmap
      atlas is soft at one end or the other), and because state names are
      editable (character set not knowable at build time). Uses the same
      canvas context labels.js measures with, so the width the layout
      reserved and the width the glyphs take are the same number, kerning
      included.
    - the halo is a constant: the SVG labels wear a white stroke under the
      glyph at 0.13 of the font size; the distance field is measured in em,
      so that reach is the same number at every size, and the shader takes
      it as a uniform that never changes.

  One departure from "vertex shader, no CPU work": the glyph quad is the
  shader's, but finding the pen positions is not. A glyph's place on the
  baseline is an arc length along a projected polyline, so a vertex shader
  would walk the whole polyline once per glyph; doing it once per run on the
  CPU is cheaper (a few thousand multiplies across the map) and is where
  centring, foreshortening and the horizon test naturally live. Still holds:
  no re-layout on rotation, no label sitting out a drag.

  Foreshortening: a baseline's own great-circle length says what it would
  measure face-on; how much shorter it measures now is how much the ground
  under it has turned away. The ratio, clamped at 0.5, is the compression —
  automatically per-label and per-frame.

  Not built, and it should be: nothing yet re-runs the layout when territory
  changes, because nothing in the harness paints a state. The wiring is
  labels.update({assign, stateInfo, assignVersion, labelsVersion, visible}),
  the same call main.js already makes. C7.

  Closed by C7, in one line: makeMainLabeler returns the globe labeler
  instead of the SVG one, so main.js's existing update call reaches it
  unchanged. The SVG state labels for the main region are gone; the two
  inset boxes keep them, since their projections never move. Result: names
  stay on the map through a drag instead of hiding for the gesture.

C6. Carving                                                            [BUILT]
  Depends on: C1, C2.

  This is the one chunk that changes what the map shows, so the "how it
  draws, not what it shows" rule at the top doesn't cover it.

  The deck.gl knife assigns whole tracts to one side or the other by their
  centroids, so the piece boundary is a tract lattice that can sit a couple
  of kilometres off the drawn line, and the drawn line isn't recoverable
  from the result. The new default is the other way round: the drawn line is
  the boundary, tracts straddling it are split, and everything a tract
  reports divides by the land area on each side. `keep tracts intact` asks
  for the old behaviour, which is also what a hand-authored preset has
  always meant when it names a list of tract GEOIDs.

  Built as:
    src/globe/cut.js            the chord walk: cut a simple ring by curves
    src/globe/carve.js          the model: cuts, the piece tree, weights, rows,
                                  the file format
    src/globe/dynamic.js        the two runtime buffers and the piece unit pool
    geometry.js unitTriangles   the county fills, kept on the CPU
    renderer.js, layers.js      the carved fills, the dividers, the knife
    split.js allocatePieces     now takes fractional tracts
    scripts/carve-check.mjs     npm run check:carve
    globe.html + dev.js         the knife, and the intact checkbox

  Measured, on Cuyahoga (427 tracts): 18 ms a cut, 22 parent triangles
  becoming 56 piece triangles and 17 divider segments. Nearly all of the
  18 ms is the per-tract weights (427 small triangulations), none of it is
  drawing. A piece reached by two cuts writes down to 3.9 KB.

  Eight things settled:

    - cutting the county's own triangles, rather than its source polygon, is
      what makes a hand-rolled clipper feasible: the compiled triangles
      arrive refined to 120 km, wound correctly, holes already resolved by
      the triangulation, and the antimeridian already unwrapped. cut.js never
      sees a hole or a multipolygon — the two cases that make a general
      polygon boolean hard. The 31 units with holes (52 of them) and the 247
      with islands need no special case; Fairfax County VA, which has
      Fairfax City as a hole in the middle, cuts like anything else, and the
      check asserts the city stays out of both pieces.
    - the area measure had to be made exact before any of this could be
      checked. The obvious measure (planar area times the cosine of the
      middle latitude) is a quadrature, and the parts don't sum to the
      whole under it: tiling residue of 6e-8 relative, too coarse to
      distinguish a real gap from noise. Green's theorem with L = -sin(lat)
      turns the integral of cos(lat) into a walk along the boundary; a
      shared edge is traversed once each way and the two terms cancel to the
      bit. Residue now 8e-15 — the difference between a check that can fail
      and one that can't.
    - there's no equivalent here of split.js's fringe machinery. split.js
      spends a parent-shaped backing piece, extruded fringe ribbons, and a
      five-step probe ladder (reclassifyRecords) reconciling the 1:500k
      tract outlines with the map's simplified county outline. Pieces that
      are the county's own triangles tile it by construction, so none of
      that has a counterpart. C8 deletes it without replacing it.
    - a piece is a unit: same unit id per vertex, same two palettes, same
      hover path, same left/right pair on the lines between pieces. Hiding a
      carved parent is one texel written to zero alpha. No shader change
      anywhere in C6.
    - rounding happens on the way in. Quantizing the drawn line to six
      decimals at export time moved it by up to a tenth of a metre — nothing
      to look at, but enough to move a county-sized piece's population by
      three people, so a piece wouldn't reload as itself. Quantizing on
      arrival instead (the line was drawn with a pointer at 295 m to the
      pixel at the deepest zoom, so eleven centimetres costs nothing real)
      makes the file and the memory the same numbers and the round trip
      bit-exact.
    - the one shape the chord walk can't produce is a hole, so the one input
      it can't take is a closed curve sitting strictly inside a triangle.
      Not hypothetical: circling an area to cut it out as an enclave is a
      gesture the deck.gl app already supports, and a loop drawn around a
      city fits inside a 120 km triangle easily. Handled by splitting that
      triangle with a straight auxiliary line first (the same call again),
      so the loop then crosses both halves.
    - a loop's ends are inside the county on purpose. "A cut that ends
      inside a county hasn't sliced it" is the rule that picks which
      counties a stroke applies to, and it's exactly wrong for a loop: it
      dropped the only county the loop was drawn in, so circling an enclave
      carved nothing. Found by writing the check, not by looking at the
      screen.
    - the antimeridian comes back once, and only in the stroke. C1 made it
      stop existing for geometry, but unproject returns [-180, 180], so a
      stroke drawn across the Aleutians steps from +179 to -179 (half a
      kilometre of water, 358 degrees of number), and the sampler that picks
      which counties a stroke crosses would walk the long way round the
      world between those two points. Accumulating the short way puts the
      whole stroke in one frame, and each county then shifts it into its
      own. Aleutians West is 43 polygons spanning 172.5 to 193.9 in its own
      frame, and the check cuts it; without the unwrap the same cut sampled
      the Atlantic.

  The file format. A piece can't be written down as a list of tract ids any
  more, since a split tract belongs to two pieces at once. What's written
  down instead is the cuts that reach it and which side of each it's on:

    { "fips": "39035",
      "tracts": ["39035101101", ...],
      "cuts": [ { "line": [[-81.85, 41.47], ...], "side": "left" } ] }

  The tract list is derived, for a person reading the file; the cuts are
  what reconstruct the geometry. `side` is left or right of the direction
  the line was drawn in, so it means something without the construction in
  front of you.

  One case has no cuts to write: a piece that follows tract lines and
  nothing else is completely described by its tracts. That's exactly the
  `{ fips, tracts }` entry "Copy JSON" has always exported, and every
  hand-authored preset uses, so those files keep working. The check loads
  Bootheel and all thirteen partial counties of Delta.

  Guards, since a stroke is drawn by hand and can ask for things that aren't
  a partition: a self-crossing stroke is refused with a message (the chord
  walk assumes chords of one curve don't separate each other's ends around a
  ring); a piece under 1e-4 of its county is a graze rather than a cut and
  its branch collapses; a tract sliver under 0.5% of the tract rounds to
  nothing and goes to whichever piece holds the rest of it; a crossing that
  lands on a vertex nudges the curve by 1e-9 degrees rather than taking a
  coin toss on the parity. The check sweeps a line in towards a county's
  edge until the graze floor bites and asserts both outcomes happen and that
  nothing under the floor is ever minted.

  Left on C7's desk, and C7 did none of it — joining C6's model to the app's
  split registry turned out to be a chunk of its own rather than a corner of
  the shell. The knife, the GeoJSON import and a preset's partial counties
  are all held back on the globe (?deck still does them). Carries to C8
  unchanged except where marked:
    - painting a piece. The harness colours pieces by a hash of their id so a
      cut is visible; assignment, state colours and the rankings are the
      shell.
    - the labeler doesn't re-lay out when a carve moves territory. C7 closed
      the general case (painting a state does re-lay out now), so what's
      left is only the carve path that reaches it.
    - re-owning the static line sides. A segment of a carved county's outer
      boundary still carries the parent's unit id in aLeft/aRight. This cost
      nothing until C3 styles a border by the two sides' states rather than
      by which group it came from — which is what C7 does now: the band, the
      grey state line and the selection outline all read the two sides'
      states from the attribute table. On a carved county all three would
      follow the retired parent, which has no state. Nothing shows it yet
      only because carving is off on the globe; it's a prerequisite for
      turning it on, not a nicety. Still needed: a CPU copy of two uint16
      arrays (1.2 MB) and a containment test per segment.
    - the AK/HI insets keep the CPU path, so a county in one can't be carved
      on the globe.

C7. Interaction and shell                                     [BUILT, UNSEEN]
  Depends on: C2-C6.
  Rotation drag, pan, zoom, reset view, globe mode toggle.
  The zoom's lower bound is currently "fit the land", recomputed from
  MAP_BOUNDS after each bake. Either recompute it from a coarse point set per
  rotation or fix it.
  Two things C4 leaves on C7's desk:
    - the knife line, the carve preview and the selection outline all move
      without the map moving, so they belong outside the cached scene,
      beside the hover tint.
    - a drag is the one gesture that must redraw the scene every frame, so
      it's where open risk 6 bites if it bites at all. Measure it first.

  Built as:
    src/globe/map.js          the one seam: createGlobeMap({canvas, features})
    shaders.js UNIT_ATTR      a second per-unit table, read by LINE_VS
    layers.js                 rewritten as the parity document, 20 layers
    renderer.js               line modes, the attribute table, view switches,
                                hover over a SET of units
    main.js                   22 branches on `globeMap`, all of them C8's to
                                delete along with the ?deck path
    index.html #data-marks    the data view's symbols, as SVG
    scripts/layer-check.mjs   npm run check:layers

  The app is otherwise untouched: the model, the stats, the ranking, the
  sidebar, the presets, the tooltip, the legend and the two inset boxes all
  run exactly as before; the insets keep deck.gl and their fixed cameras.
  `?deck` puts the old renderer back on the same page, for the C3 comparison.

  Seven things settled:

    - the camera bridge is two lines. main.js works in a 975x610 design box
      and lets an SVG viewBox fit it to the canvas; C1 fitted the compiled
      globe to the same box from the same d3.geoOrthographic fit. So a
      d3.zoom (k, x, y) maps onto the camera's (zoom, pan) directly:
          pan = fit * dpr * (globeTranslate * (k - 1) + t)
      and the radius agrees already, both being globeScale * k * fit. d3.zoom
      stays in charge of the wheel feel, the scale extent and the gesture
      filter; only its destination changed. main.js asserts the two fits
      agree at startup, since if they ever stop agreeing every pixel is half
      a continent out and nothing else would say so.
    - the second table matters more than the palette. A fill asks one
      question about one unit, which the palette answers. Every line that
      matters asks about the two units it separates: is this a state border
      or a county hairline, does the band run along here, is this segment on
      the selected state's outline. main.js answers those on the CPU and
      re-uploads a colour or a filter value per segment; here they're three
      texel reads in the vertex shader, off a unit -> (state index, flags)
      table, with the four answers one `uMode` uniform apart. Painting a
      county is now three texels and no geometry — fill, band, owner — and
      that one change restyles the borders, the band and the selection with
      it.
    - the band was wrong in the harness, and it wasn't visible there. C2
      stroked the band's stencil along every county arc with skipEqual,
      which is right only when every unit is its own state — exactly how the
      harness tints. Against the real assignment it would have drawn a
      border band down every county line in America. Same story for the grey
      state line: there was no state to be a border of in the harness. Both
      fell out of the attribute table, and neither was visible until the
      app's own model was behind it.
    - the selection outline goes inside the cached scene, against what C4
      left on this desk. C4's rule (an overlay that moves without the map
      wants to be outside) doesn't apply here because the selection doesn't
      move without the map: picking a state also dims, highlights and
      deepens it, so it invalidates the scene anyway. Drawing it inside costs
      one pass over the border strokes on a frame that's already redrawing,
      against a pass on every hover frame if it sat outside. The knife stays
      outside; it follows the pointer and nothing else.
    - the zoom floor is a coarse point set, as this entry proposed: eight
      points per unit ring (~30k total), projected through the current
      facing and reduced to a bounding box. A bound only cares about
      extremes, so the answer lands within a pixel of the full map's for
      three orders of magnitude less work. Runs per rotation frame, since a
      facing now changes 60 times a second.
    - two things the app read off projected geometry had to be replaced: the
      zoom floor above, and the per-county centroids the data view places
      its symbols and values from (computeCountyGeo). The centroids are now
      an area-weighted sum over each unit's compiled triangles, done once on
      the sphere and re-projected per facing, with the far side dropped the
      way clipping used to drop it. Everything else main.js needs — hover,
      picking, the band, the borders — asks about units, not points.
    - the spin preview is gone. beginSpin/spinTo/settleSpin still exist for
      the ?deck path; on the globe spinTo is setRotation, so every frame of a
      drag is the real map — county lines, bands, labels, the lot — with no
      settle, no coarse outline, no 130 ms, and no labels sitting out the
      gesture.

  Left undone, deliberately: carving. The knife, the GeoJSON import and a
  preset's partial counties all write into main.js's split registry (splits,
  splitCountyGeometry, fringeRibbons, applyPartition), and C6's model is a
  different representation of the same idea that nothing joins to it. The
  globe would take the cut and show nothing, so all three are held back with
  a message rather than left to cut a map that can't draw the result: `?deck`
  still does them. A preset's partial counties are left unclaimed rather
  than claimed whole, so a preset means less than it should but never the
  wrong thing. Joining them is the first job of C8 — C6's carver already has
  the pieces, the rows and the file format; what's missing is somewhere in
  the app model to put them, and the static line sides need re-owning first
  (see the end of C6).

  Also open, and smaller:
    - the 27.3 MB of compiled geometry now blocks the app's first paint,
      where before it only blocked the harness. C1's note about drawing the
      sphere and the world first is no longer a nicety.
    - the data view's symbols moved from the map to the overlay SVG, so the
      hover tint no longer falls on them (it did on the deck path, where the
      tint canvas sat above the map and below the SVG). It's 7% black on a
      symbol; if it reads wrong, the fix is a mark program, not a re-layer.
    - main.js still bakes the main region once at startup and still runs
      rebuildDerived per refresh, producing arrays no renderer reads.
      Harmless, wasteful, and C8's to delete.

C8. Cutover
  Depends on: everything.
  First, and not a deletion: join C6's carver to the app model, which is the
  one thing C7 held back — and re-own the static line sides first (see the
  end of C6). Then the ?deck escape hatch goes, and with it all 22 branches
  on `globeMap` in main.js.
  Delete: bakeMain, projectParts/projectLines/projectRuns for the main
  region, the spin preview and coarsen, MAP_BOUNDS recompute, all
  MaskExtension usage, edgeBandPaths and bandMaskPaths, the antimeridian and
  Panama seam special cases in build-world.mjs (artifacts of flattening).
  And, from C6: splitCountyGeometry, tractsAcrossCut, reclassifyRecords,
  fringeRibbons, carveIndex and the backing piece — they exist to reconcile
  tract outlines with the drawn county line, and cutting the county's own
  polygon means there's nothing to reconcile. allocatePieces stays: src/globe
  imports it, and it already takes the fractional tracts C6 needs.
  Keep: everything in the build scripts, presets.js, all stats and ranking,
  the insets.
  globe-check.mjs needs rewriting against the new representation.
  Presets keep their `{ fips, tracts }` entries verbatim; C6 reads them as a
  cut along tract lines and check:carve asserts Bootheel and Delta still
  load.

What gets simpler
------------------
Offsets the added renderer code, not a pitch:
  - horizon clipping becomes one line of shader
  - the antimeridian stops existing, along with the Chukotka and Fiji seams
  - MaskExtension goes away entirely (bands and aprons become real geometry)
  - picking loses the GPU readback stall
  - recolouring becomes a texel write
  - labels stop being rebuilt on rotation, and stop sitting out the drag
  - the coarse spin preview and the 130ms settle both disappear (done, C7)
  - a state border, the band along it and the selection outline stop being
    CPU-side subsets of the arc list and become one texel per unit (done, C7)
  - a carve loses the backing piece, the fringe ribbons and the probe ladder,
    because pieces cut from the county's own polygon tile it exactly (done, C6)
  - a cut becomes storable: it's lon/lat, so it survives a turn and a file

Open risks
----------
  1. Line quality (C2). CLOSED. The original framing ("risk at 1px") was
     wrong — hairlines were always fine. The real problems were at the wide
     end, the 16px halo and the 10px band; see C2's closing lesson for why.
  2. Carving buffer management (C6). CLOSED — not the hard part of C6, or even
     a part of it. The original assumption (a carve patches the parent's
     sub-range of the static fill buffer) forces two problems: a piece has
     more triangles than the parent did, so the range no longer fits, and
     reclaiming what a recut abandons is defragmentation. A second, small,
     wholesale-rewritten buffer has neither, and every carve on the map costs
     a hundredth of what one frame already draws. What C6 actually cost was
     the arithmetic: the clipper, and getting the area measure exact enough
     to check.
  3. Antarctica triangulation (C1). Known, bounded, annoying.
  4. We own ~2-3k lines of renderer we didn't own before (src/globe is 2,540
     as of C5, ~3,700 as of C6, 4,600 as of C7, 5,200 with the harness). The
     original estimate is comfortably blown; the last chunk was the cheapest
     of the three (C7 added ~600 lines, of which the app-facing seam, map.js,
     is 324). This is an ongoing cost, not a one-off. C5 adds a text stack —
     glyph atlas, distance field, placer — the largest single addition after
     the renderer itself. C6 adds a polygon clipper, the second largest, and
     the one place the alternative was an off-the-shelf dependency; it came
     to ~350 lines because it only ever cuts triangles (a general boolean
     would be several times the code). C8 hands some of this back: split.js's
     backing, fringe ribbons and probe ladder have no counterpart on the
     globe.
  5. Label quality at small sizes (C5). Open until it is looked at; see the
     decision point below.
  6. OPEN: what a scene frame costs at the zoomed-out view. C0 measured
     hairlines only; C2 measured the 16px coast halo for its shape (the spiky
     caps), never for its fill rate. A 16px stroke at dpr 2 lays a 34px wide
     quad over every segment of a run, and at the North America view the
     coast segments are a few pixels long, so the ~124,000 coast and world
     coast segments paint their halo over itself about sixteen times — order
     100M fragments, all blended, for one layer. Zoomed in, almost all of it
     is off screen — the same asymmetry the hover lag exposed.
     The framebuffer (C4) hides this from the hover but not from a drag,
     which must redraw the scene every frame — so if the number is bad, it's
     C7's problem, and the first thing to measure there. The harness reports
     "scene frame" and "hover-only frame" separately for this.
     Also worth checking: the world lake edges are 142,614 segments, a third
     of every line instance in the file, drawn at 1.1px in both views —
     cheap per quad but there are a lot of them. If a drag comes out slow,
     check whether the cost is the halo's fill rate or that group's vertex
     count before reaching for decimation — they want different fixes.
     If it needs fixing, the lever is fewer quads, not a cheaper shader: the
     halo's shape tolerance is about half its own width, so the coast run can
     be decimated hard for the halo pass alone (~8x at that zoom) with
     nothing visible changing. Same conclusion C0 reached about county arcs,
     for the same reason.
     Cheap to check: turn the globe on `/` at the home view and drag. Every
     frame of that drag is a full scene redraw, and `?deck` is there to
     compare the feel against.

Decision points
----------------
  After C0: does the frame budget hold on the weakest target machine.

  After C3: does it look identical to the current map side by side. If not,
  stop and find out why before building C4-C7 on top of it.
  Deferred until C7, since before that there was nothing to put side by
  side (the harness tints every unit its own colour and has no states, no
  selection, no data view). Now `/` and `/?deck` are the same page with the
  same model and two renderers, so the comparison is a reload.
  Four places the two are known not to agree, so they aren't the finding:
  the under-lake edges (pixels here, ground units there — see C3), the data
  view's symbols (SVG here, so the hover tint no longer lands on them), the
  band and state lines on a carved county (C6 left the parent's unit ids on
  its outer segments), and carving itself, which only ?deck does.

  After C6: the pieces have never been looked at on screen. What node can
  check is checked, and it's the half that matters most (the pieces tile,
  the rows sum, a piece reloads as itself), but none of it says whether a
  cut reads. Three things to watch for: whether the divider hairline reads
  as a county line or as something thinner or coarser (it comes out of a
  different buffer at the same width); whether the band along a piece
  boundary looks like the band along a county boundary (the first real test
  of the stencil construction against geometry it didn't come from); and
  whether the pieces of one county are visibly seamed — they share exact
  vertices, so they shouldn't be, and a hairline crack would mean the cut
  points aren't reproduced identically on both sides of the join.

  After C5: the labels have never been looked at on screen. Everything
  checkable in node is checked (the frame, the ground sizes, the distance
  field), but none of that says whether the type reads well on a sphere.
  Two things to watch for, both cheap to fix and neither shows in a number:
  SDF glyphs at the small end (~10 CSS px at the home view, where a distance
  field is weakest), and whether MIN_COMPRESS at 0.5 is the right place to
  stop foreshortening near the limb.
  Best checked on `/` rather than in the harness: the labels are over the
  real state colours, at the real sizes, beside the SVG ones the two inset
  boxes still draw.

  After C7, and this gates C8. Nothing in C7 has been looked at, and it's
  the whole app rather than a harness:
    - does a drag hold up (open risk 6), and does it feel like the ?deck pan;
    - do the state colours, the border bands and the grey state lines match
      ?deck side by side (the C3 decision point above);
    - does painting still feel immediate — a brush stroke is now a palette
      rewrite plus, when territory moves, a 95 ms label relayout;
    - the data view: the choropleth through the palette, and the symbols now
      that they are SVG.
  Everything C7 held back is off on the globe and works on ?deck, so anything
  carve-shaped that looks wrong is a message, not a bug.
